---
layout: post
title:  "Bias in the input data?"
date:   2026-02-07
---

I have written elsewhere about the technique I use to generate Toroidals for my solver experiments.  Briefly, the input data for all puzzles I've used in my experiments are generated by applying legal sequences of random moves, but I always used an even number of them.  For 4x4 Toroidals, my solvers always produced solutions with an even number of moves.  

It wasn't difficult for me to generate 4x4 puzzles that were generated using an odd number of randomized moves, and I can report that the solutions methods I've built so far produce solutions with odd numbers of moves.  

This is a bias in the input data.  I'm pretty sure that it doesn't invalidate my conclusions (including for 3x3 Toroidals), but I better check to be sure.  It won't take much effort to randomize the number of steps.

While I am at it, I should check how the number of moves used to produce randomized Toroidals affects the solution length.  When the number of random moves is very small, a bias will be introduced; if I generate a problem with 4 random moves, then I can expect an optimal solution with 4 moves or less.  But it's not clear how much shuffling is indistinguishable from more shuffling.

And then there's the check that I make that ensures that a random move is ignored if it undoes the previous random move.  This check might produce a bias that has gone unnoticed.  Maybe with enough random moves, an occasional pair of cancelling moves might not even matter.

All this should be checked, though.  


