---
layout: post
title:  "Preventing useless sequences"
date:   2023-08-09
categories:  Solver
usemathjax: true
---
<style>
blockquote 
{
    color: #111;
    letter-spacing: 0px;
    font-size: 16px;
}
table
{
    max-width: 0px;
    margin-left:auto; 
    margin-right:auto;  
}
</style>

**Some sequences are not worth looking at.**
In [a previous posting]({% post_url 2023-08-02-IDS_A %}), I described a simple version of Iterative Deepening Search (IDS), which explored all possible move sequences, starting with length 1, then length 2, etc.  This is a very simple algorithm to build, and it is guaranteed not to miss a solution, provided you give it enough time.

The problem with this simple approach is that it looks at far too many sequences, most especially, sequences that are totally pointless, like `L1 R1 L1 R1`; this sequence pushes row 1 back and forth, making no progress at all.  It also considers `L1 L2` to be a different sequence than `L2 L1` even though the two have identical effects on a Toroidal. 
Because  Simple IDS spends time looking at all the useless sequences, it can take a long time to find solutions to relatively simple Toroidal puzzles.

**Preventing useless sequences.**
Briefly, avoiding useless sequences can be accomplished by a simple principle. 
> If two different sequences of moves have the same effect, and one is shorter than the other, prevent trying the longer one.
> If two sequences have the same effect, and they are the same length, choose one of them, and prevent the other.  

Admittedly, my description is a bit vague.  I will describe it in more detail in a separate posting.  I didn't want this one to be too long.  But I will provide examples to give the basic idea.
1. Useless sequences like `L1 R1` are prevented, because it's equivalent to a sequence with zero moves.
2. In a 3x3 Toroidal, the sequence `L1 L1` is equivalent to the single action `R1`.  So we will allow `R1` to be tried, because it's shorter, but `L1 L1` will be prevented.
3. In a 4x4 Toroidal,  `L1 L1` and `R1 R1` have the same effect; we arbitrarily allow the first sequence, and prevent the second.  

With just this one principle, we can eliminate a vast quantity of useless moves.  This principle can be encoded in the part of the program that proposes new moves to add to a sequence.  It is far faster to generate only the good moves than it is to generate all moves, and then delete the ones you don't want.  

**Running the program.**
I applied my Enhanced version of IDS to the same set of 100 random 3x3 Toroidal problems as in the previous posting.  The solver was given a time limit of 120 seconds, just as in the previous posting.

It was able to solve 99 out of 100 3x3 Toroidals.  I forced the solver to find a solution to the last remaining example, which had a solution of length 8, and took 226s.  Since this was the only one, I included it in my statistical calculations. The results are summarized below:

| Solution length | Number | Simple IDS | Enhanced IDS | Speed-up Factor |
|:-:|--:|--:|--:|--:|
| 4 |   7 |       0.47 |   0.101 |    3.96  |
| 5 |  17 |       4.20 |   0.631 |    6.47  |
| 6 |  38 |      38.90 |   3.710 |   10.03  |
| 7 |  35 |    *400*   |  20.900 |  *19.00* |
| 8 |   3 |   *4000*   | 126.700 |  *32.00* |

The column **Simple IDS** shows the times  (in seconds) needed by the Simple IDS implementation from before.  The column labelled **Enhanced IDS** shows the time (in seconds) needed when useless sequences are avoided, as described above.  The column labelled **Speed-up Factor** shows how many times faster Enhanced IDS is as compared to Simple IDS; for example, Enhanced IDS is 3.96 times faster than Simple IDS at finding solutions of length 4.  

Italicized values in the table are estimates. I guessed that Simple IDS would require about 400 seconds on average to find solutions of length 7, and 4000 seconds to find solutions of length 8.  If we accept these guesses as plausible, the estimated Factor for solutions of length 7 is about 19, and for 8 is around 32.  

**Faster IDS is not good enough.**
Avoiding useless sequences speeds up IDS significantly.  Going forward, we will continue to use this principle of avoiding useless sequences.

However, we've gone about as far as we can go with IDS.  Even if we avoid useless sequences, IDS still takes a rather long time to solve the trickiest 3x3 Toroidals.


